Traditional methods for helping robots work alongside humans take inspiration from an idea in psychology called theory of mind. It suggests that people engage and empathize with one another by developing an understanding of one another's beliefs—a skill we develop as young children. Researchers who draw upon this theory focus on getting robots to construct a model of their collaborators' underlying intent as the basis for predicting their actions.
Dorsa Sadigh, an assistant professor at Stanford, thinks this is inefficient. "If you think about human-human interactions, we don’t really do that," she says. "If we’re trying to move a table together, we don’t do belief modeling." Instead, she says, two people moving a table rely on simple signals like the forces they feel from their collaborator pushing or pulling the table: "So I think what is really happening is that when humans are doing a task together, they keep track of something that's much lower-dimensional."
Using this idea, a robot could store very simple descriptions of its surrounding agents' actions. In a game of air hockey, for example, it might store its opponents' movements with only one word: "right," "left," or "center." It can then use this data to train two separate algorithms: a machine-learning algorithm that predicts where the opponent will move next, and a reinforcement-learning algorithm to determine how it should respond. The latter algorithm also keeps track of how the opponent changes tack on the basis of its own response, so it can learn to influence the opponent's actions.
The key idea here is the lightweight nature of the training data, which is what allows the robot to perform all this parallel training on the fly. A more traditional approach might store the coordinates for the entire pathway of the opponent's movements, not just their overarching direction. While it may seem counterintuitive that less is more, it's worth remembering again Sadigh's theory about human interaction. We, too, model the people around us only in broad strokes.
The researchers tested this idea in simulation for applications including a self-driving car, and in the real world with a game of robot air hockey. In each of the trials, the new technique outperformed previous methods for teaching robots to adapt to surrounding agents. The robot also effectively learned to influence those around it.